src/blog/2023-08-13_explanning-my-activitypub-comments.md, before:

---
image: /images/typescript.png
metas:
  title: Explaining the new comment system
  image: /images/typescript.png
  lang: en-US
  description:
    So, using Mastodon replies as comments are all the rage this past few months. 
    And I too wanted to be like the cool kids. In this post I want to tell you 
    how I did it.
  mastodonLink: https://cuscuz.in/@jedi/110885262441927297
---

_Post image: A snippet of generic typescript code. Black background, cyan, green
and white font colors._

A few people asked me how I got the comment section you'll find on the end of
the page working. Sure, I could just point to the giants on whose shoulders I'm
standing (as I did on a previous post), but I believe I've now made enough
changes to deserve a post on its own.

## The task at hand

The objective was simple: I wanted to have comments on each post without using
any dedicated comment system. Those normally are paid and I want to use my
current funds with another endeavor. The problem is that I use a static site
generator, [Lume][lume01], that doesn't allow me to use my favorite UI library,
[Preact][preact01], on the client side, only during a compile phase.

That's when I stumbled on a post by [Julian Fietkau][fietkau01] where he uses
Mastodon's public API to get the replies of a post and display them as comments,
using only plain javascript and DOM manipulation, like the good ol' days. That's
exactly what I needed! And you should check his post for all the details and his
thoughts on the fediverse.

But I digress...

I took his code and, with a few modifications, I had a comment system working in
no time!

## Making it my own

I intended to leave that way, but my pride as a developer and artist didn't
allow me to leave it as a copy: it needs to be a reinterpretation! So I started
making small changes here and there, and now it is very different from Julian's.

Let me go through all the code.

### Getting the replies

First, let's see how we get the data we need:

```js
async function loadComments(url, postId) {
  const context = await fetch(url).then((response) => response.json());

  if (Array.isArray(context.descendants) === false) {
    return [];
  }

  const tempMap = new Map();
  return context.descendants
    .filter((comment) => comment.visibility === "public")
    .map((comment) => ({ ...comment, children: [] }))
    .filter((comment) => {
      const parent = tempMap.get(comment.in_reply_to_id);
      if (parent) {
        parent.children.push(comment);
      }
      tempMap.set(comment.id, comment);
      return comment.in_reply_to_id === postId;
    });
}
```

This is the part of the code that I left mostly untouched, as it is pretty
straight forward. The function calls an URL and processes the response to create
a tree of replies, with the direct replies to given postId on the root.

I did change the iterations from `for` loops to Array methods, but it is a
purely stylistic choice.

It's important to note that the code first filters to only process comments with
`"public"` visibility. The Mastodon API returns, for anonymous calls,
`"unlisted"` posts too, that are technically public, but are intended to not be
on public listings. Let's respect the users rights and choices of privacy, shall
we?

Now, what to do with this data?

### HyperScript

Directly manipulating the DOM is ok. It works. Julian's implementation even used
a `<template/>` HTML tag that I didn't have an opportunity use before, and was
very instructive for me to learn how to work with it.

But I'm a components guy. I told you my favorite UI lib is Preact, but I didn't
want to introduce another build pipeline or complicate the code with another
syntax.

Then I remembered an blog post by [Jason Miller][developit01] who, incidentally,
is the creator of Preact. In his post, he explains that JSX (the syntax used by
Preact, React and others) is just sugar for a thing called hypescript. Well...
not exactly, but close enough for my purposes.

Here's what it looks like:

```js
function h(tag, attributes, ...args) {
  return { tag, attributes, children: args.length ? [...args] : null };
}

function render(component) {
  if (component.appendChild) {
    // Component already rendered. Do nothing with it.
    return component;
  }
  if (typeof component === "string") {
    return document.createTextNode(component);
  } else {
    const element = document.createElement(component.tag);

    Object.entries(component.attributes || {}).forEach(
      ([k, v]) => (element[k] = v),
    );

    (component.children || []).forEach((child) => {
      if (child !== null && typeof child !== "boolean") {
        element.appendChild(render(child));
      }
    });

    return element;
  }
}
```

The first function, `h()`, is a builder function that helps me create a
component tree in the format of a JSON object. Then this tree is passed to the
`render()` function to be translated to a DOM Element to be append on the page's
HTML.

```js
//Example
let Link = () => h("a", { href: "https://example.com" }, "Example");
render(Link()); // returns <a href="https://example.com">Example</a>
```

The only real difference from the Jason's example is that the `render()` handles
already rendered components, and does nothing with them. You'll see why later in
the text.

With this functions, I can create my own UI "components".

```js
function Placeholder() {
  return h("p", undefined, "Loading...");
}

function EmptyList() {
  return h("p", undefined, "No comments so far");
}

function Avatar({ avatar_static, display_name }) {
  return h("img", {
    src: avatar_static,
    alt: display_name.replace(/:.+?:/g, "").trim() + "'s avatar",
  });
}

function UserInfo({ url, acct, display_name, emojis }) {
  let account = acct;
  if (account.indexOf("@") === -1) {
    account = account + "@" + new URL(url).hostname;
  }
  return h("h3", {
    innerHTML: `${formatEmojisOnText(emojis, display_name)}&nbsp;@${account}`,
  });
}

function Timestamp({ created_at, edited_at, url }) {
  return h(
    "a",
    { href: url },
    h("time", { dateTime: created_at }, formatIsoDate(created_at)),
    edited_at &&
      h(
        "time",
        {
          title: "Last edited: " + formatIsoDate(edited_at),
          dateTime: edited_at,
        },
        "*",
      ),
  );
}

function Article(comment) {
  return h(
    "article",
    undefined,
    h(
      "header",
      undefined,
      Avatar(comment.account),
      UserInfo(comment.account),
      Timestamp(comment),
    ),
    h("p", { innerHTML: formatEmojisOnText(comment.emojis, comment.content) }),
  );
}

function ReplyList(comments, mentionFilter) {
  return h(
    "ul",
    undefined,
    ...comments.map((comment) =>
      h(
        "li",
        undefined,
        formatComment(comment, mentionFilter),
        ReplyList(comment.children, [comment.account.url]),
      )
    ),
  );
}
```

Now I can take that comment tree and transform it directly to a component tree,
to be rendered into DOM Elements later.

But what are those `formatThings` functions? Well... They format things!

Just kidding. Here are they:

```js
function formatIsoDate(isoDate) {
  return new Date(isoDate).toLocaleString(undefined, {
    dateStyle: "long",
    timeStyle: "short",
  });
}
```

The first one is the simplest, it only translates the date for a more readable
format.

```js
function formatEmojisOnText(emojis, text) {
  return emojis.reduce(
    (acc, { shortcode, static_url, url }) =>
      acc.replaceAll(
        `:${shortcode}:`,
        `<picture><source srcset="${url}" media="(prefers-reduced-motion: no-preference)"><img src="${static_url}" alt=":${shortcode}:" title=":${shortcode}:"></picture>`,
      ),
    text,
  );
}
```

This one is also relatively simple. It iterates on an array of custom emojis,
and replaces each one's `shortcode` with its image's url. So I can show that
rolling Bulbasaur that you proudly wear on your display name.

Now the fun one:

```js
const defaultFilter = ["https://cuscuz.in/@jedi"];
function formatComment(comment, firstMentionFilter = defaultFilter) {
  const articleElement = render(Article(comment));

  firstMentionFilter
    .map((filter) => `.mention[href='${filter}']:first-child`)
    .map((selector) => articleElement.querySelector(selector))
    .forEach((mention) => mention?.remove());

  articleElement
    .querySelectorAll(".invisible")
    .forEach((element) => element.remove());

  return articleElement;
}
```

You see, there are two interesting behaviors on Mastodon's API. And in this
formatter function I handle both.

The first one is that, when you start to compose a reply to a post, most
Mastodon apps add to the start of the text all the accounts mentioned on the
original post. That's ok for Mastodon, but Julian's implementation correctly
assumes that it would clutter the comments content and removes the author of the
post that the reply refers to, so I did the same here.

The other behavior is that Mastodon marks the start and end of a long URL with a
`.invisible` CSS class so clients can hide them, replacing the need for a URL
shortener (those may include privacy issues). I'd like to keep my blog with a
[classless][csstricks01] css style, so I just remove them.

As those are info inside a HTML response from Mastodon API, I first need to
render the `Article` component. That's why my `render()` needs to handle already
rendered components.

## All together now!

Let's see how we can display the comments with all that code:

```js
if ("loading" === document.readyState) {
  document.addEventListener("DOMContentLoaded", initComments);
} else {
  initComments();
}

async function initComments() {
  const wrapper = document.querySelector("section#comments");
  if (!wrapper) {
    return;
  }

  const placeholder = render(Placeholder());
  wrapper.appendChild(placeholder);

  try {
    const idRegex = /\/@\w+\/(\d+)$/;

    const url = wrapper.dataset.url;
    const postId = idRegex.exec(url)[1];
    const commentContext = url.replace(idRegex, `/api/v1/statuses/$1/context`);

    const comments = await loadComments(commentContext, postId);
    const commentsList = render(
      comments.length === 0 ? EmptyList() : ReplyList(comments),
    );
    placeholder.replaceWith(commentsList);
  } catch (err) {
    console.error(err);
    placeholder.innerText =
      `Could not load comments because of: ${err.message}`;
  }
}
```

On page load, we check if there's a comment section and render a Placeholder
component inside this section, to indicate the comments are loading. I use
[Lume's front matter][lume02] to conditionally add this section with a data
attribute with an url to a Mastodon post, if it exists.

Then I get this url, process it to get only the post ID and create the final API
call, and with the result, I replace the placeholder with the right component.

## Simple as that

That's all I wanted to share with you. You may find the final and complete code
[here][jedi01]. And the CSS for the comments are in a dedicated file
[here][jedi02]. Feel free to use them.

My current flow today is as follows: I publish an article on my blog, then I
post a toot on my Mastodon profile promoting the post. With that toot url, I
update my blog article connecting both. Et voilà! Replies are now comments.

Besides mine, and Julian's take that I mentioned a lot on this text, there are a
lot of different people doing the same in different ways, with different
languages and technologies. I'd like to directly mention
[Óscar Otero's version][oscarotero01] with webcomponents, where he lists all the
"inspiration chain" that led to his version.

God, how I love the open source community!

I hope that you too will be inspired to create your own version. And if you do,
please, show me!

Thanks!

> A special thanks to [@BackAlleyUrbanist][urbanists01] for reviewing my broken
> english.

[csstricks01]: https://css-tricks.com/no-class-css-frameworks/
[developit01]: https://jasonformat.com/wtf-is-jsx/
[fietkau01]: https://fietkau.blog/2023/another_blog_resurrection_fediverse_new_comment_system
[jedi01]: https://github.com/thiagojedi/thiagojedi.github.io/blob/main/src/assets/mastodon_comments.js
[jedi02]: https://github.com/thiagojedi/thiagojedi.github.io/blob/main/src/comments.css
[lume01]: https://lume.land/
[lume02]: https://lume.land/docs/creating-pages/page-data/
[oscarotero01]: https://github.com/oom-components/mastodon-comments
[preact01]: https://preactjs.com/
[urbanists01]: https://urbanists.social/@BackAlleyUrbanist

Commit message:

Add vanilla version of comments

src/blog/2023-08-13_explanning-my-activitypub-comments.md, after:

---
image: /images/typescript.png
metas:
  title: Explaining the new comment system
  image: /images/typescript.png
  lang: en-US
  description:
    So, using Mastodon replies as comments are all the rage this past few months. 
    And I too wanted to be like the cool kids. In this post I want to tell you 
    how I did it.
  mastodonLink: https://fosstodon.org/@jedi@cuscuz.in/110885262404839437
---

_Post image: A snippet of generic typescript code. Black background, cyan, green
and white font colors._

A few people asked me how I got the comment section you'll find on the end of
the page working. Sure, I could just point to the giants on whose shoulders I'm
standing (as I did on a previous post), but I believe I've now made enough
changes to deserve a post on its own.

## The task at hand

The objective was simple: I wanted to have comments on each post without using
any dedicated comment system. Those normally are paid and I want to use my
current funds with another endeavor. The problem is that I use a static site
generator, [Lume][lume01], that doesn't allow me to use my favorite UI library,
[Preact][preact01], on the client side, only during a compile phase.

That's when I stumbled on a post by [Julian Fietkau][fietkau01] where he uses
Mastodon's public API to get the replies of a post and display them as comments,
using only plain javascript and DOM manipulation, like the good ol' days. That's
exactly what I needed! And you should check his post for all the details and his
thoughts on the fediverse.

But I digress...

I took his code and, with a few modifications, I had a comment system working in
no time!

## Making it my own

I intended to leave that way, but my pride as a developer and artist didn't
allow me to leave it as a copy: it needs to be a reinterpretation! So I started
making small changes here and there, and now it is very different from Julian's.

Let me go through all the code.

### Getting the replies

First, let's see how we get the data we need:

```js
async function loadComments(url, postId) {
  const context = await fetch(url).then((response) => response.json());

  if (Array.isArray(context.descendants) === false) {
    return [];
  }

  const tempMap = new Map();
  return context.descendants
    .filter((comment) => comment.visibility === "public")
    .map((comment) => ({ ...comment, children: [] }))
    .filter((comment) => {
      const parent = tempMap.get(comment.in_reply_to_id);
      if (parent) {
        parent.children.push(comment);
      }
      tempMap.set(comment.id, comment);
      return comment.in_reply_to_id === postId;
    });
}
```

This is the part of the code that I left mostly untouched, as it is pretty
straight forward. The function calls an URL and processes the response to create
a tree of replies, with the direct replies to given postId on the root.

I did change the iterations from `for` loops to Array methods, but it is a
purely stylistic choice.

It's important to note that the code first filters to only process comments with
`"public"` visibility. The Mastodon API returns, for anonymous calls,
`"unlisted"` posts too, that are technically public, but are intended to not be
on public listings. Let's respect the users rights and choices of privacy, shall
we?

Now, what to do with this data?

### HyperScript

Directly manipulating the DOM is ok. It works. Julian's implementation even used
a `<template/>` HTML tag that I didn't have an opportunity use before, and was
very instructive for me to learn how to work with it.

But I'm a components guy. I told you my favorite UI lib is Preact, but I didn't
want to introduce another build pipeline or complicate the code with another
syntax.

Then I remembered an blog post by [Jason Miller][developit01] who, incidentally,
is the creator of Preact. In his post, he explains that JSX (the syntax used by
Preact, React and others) is just sugar for a thing called hypescript. Well...
not exactly, but close enough for my purposes.

Here's what it looks like:

```js
function h(tag, attributes, ...args) {
  return { tag, attributes, children: args.length ? [...args] : null };
}

function render(component) {
  if (component.appendChild) {
    // Component already rendered. Do nothing with it.
    return component;
  }
  if (typeof component === "string") {
    return document.createTextNode(component);
  } else {
    const element = document.createElement(component.tag);

    Object.entries(component.attributes || {}).forEach(
      ([k, v]) => (element[k] = v),
    );

    (component.children || []).forEach((child) => {
      if (child !== null && typeof child !== "boolean") {
        element.appendChild(render(child));
      }
    });

    return element;
  }
}
```

The first function, `h()`, is a builder function that helps me create a
component tree in the format of a JSON object. Then this tree is passed to the
`render()` function to be translated to a DOM Element to be append on the page's
HTML.

```js
//Example
let Link = () => h("a", { href: "https://example.com" }, "Example");
render(Link()); // returns <a href="https://example.com">Example</a>
```

The only real difference from the Jason's example is that the `render()` handles
already rendered components, and does nothing with them. You'll see why later in
the text.

With this functions, I can create my own UI "components".

```js
function Placeholder() {
  return h("p", undefined, "Loading...");
}

function EmptyList() {
  return h("p", undefined, "No comments so far");
}

function Avatar({ avatar_static, display_name }) {
  return h("img", {
    src: avatar_static,
    alt: display_name.replace(/:.+?:/g, "").trim() + "'s avatar",
  });
}

function UserInfo({ url, acct, display_name, emojis }) {
  let account = acct;
  if (account.indexOf("@") === -1) {
    account = account + "@" + new URL(url).hostname;
  }
  return h("h3", {
    innerHTML: `${formatEmojisOnText(emojis, display_name)}&nbsp;@${account}`,
  });
}

function Timestamp({ created_at, edited_at, url }) {
  return h(
    "a",
    { href: url },
    h("time", { dateTime: created_at }, formatIsoDate(created_at)),
    edited_at &&
      h(
        "time",
        {
          title: "Last edited: " + formatIsoDate(edited_at),
          dateTime: edited_at,
        },
        "*",
      ),
  );
}

function Article(comment) {
  return h(
    "article",
    undefined,
    h(
      "header",
      undefined,
      Avatar(comment.account),
      UserInfo(comment.account),
      Timestamp(comment),
    ),
    h("p", { innerHTML: formatEmojisOnText(comment.emojis, comment.content) }),
  );
}

function ReplyList(comments, mentionFilter) {
  return h(
    "ul",
    undefined,
    ...comments.map((comment) =>
      h(
        "li",
        undefined,
        formatComment(comment, mentionFilter),
        ReplyList(comment.children, [comment.account.url]),
      )
    ),
  );
}
```

Now I can take that comment tree and transform it directly to a component tree,
to be rendered into DOM Elements later.

But what are those `formatThings` functions? Well... They format things!

Just kidding. Here are they:

```js
function formatIsoDate(isoDate) {
  return new Date(isoDate).toLocaleString(undefined, {
    dateStyle: "long",
    timeStyle: "short",
  });
}
```

The first one is the simplest, it only translates the date for a more readable
format.

```js
function formatEmojisOnText(emojis, text) {
  return emojis.reduce(
    (acc, { shortcode, static_url, url }) =>
      acc.replaceAll(
        `:${shortcode}:`,
        `<picture><source srcset="${url}" media="(prefers-reduced-motion: no-preference)"><img src="${static_url}" alt=":${shortcode}:" title=":${shortcode}:"></picture>`,
      ),
    text,
  );
}
```

This one is also relatively simple. It iterates on an array of custom emojis,
and replaces each one's `shortcode` with its image's url. So I can show that
rolling Bulbasaur that you proudly wear on your display name.

Now the fun one:

```js
const defaultFilter = ["https://cuscuz.in/@jedi"];
function formatComment(comment, firstMentionFilter = defaultFilter) {
  const articleElement = render(Article(comment));

  firstMentionFilter
    .map((filter) => `.mention[href='${filter}']:first-child`)
    .map((selector) => articleElement.querySelector(selector))
    .forEach((mention) => mention?.remove());

  articleElement
    .querySelectorAll(".invisible")
    .forEach((element) => element.remove());

  return articleElement;
}
```

You see, there are two interesting behaviors on Mastodon's API. And in this
formatter function I handle both.

The first one is that, when you start to compose a reply to a post, most
Mastodon apps add to the start of the text all the accounts mentioned on the
original post. That's ok for Mastodon, but Julian's implementation correctly
assumes that it would clutter the comments content and removes the author of the
post that the reply refers to, so I did the same here.

The other behavior is that Mastodon marks the start and end of a long URL with a
`.invisible` CSS class so clients can hide them, replacing the need for a URL
shortener (those may include privacy issues). I'd like to keep my blog with a
[classless][csstricks01] css style, so I just remove them.

As those are info inside a HTML response from Mastodon API, I first need to
render the `Article` component. That's why my `render()` needs to handle already
rendered components.

## All together now!

Let's see how we can display the comments with all that code:

```js
if ("loading" === document.readyState) {
  document.addEventListener("DOMContentLoaded", initComments);
} else {
  initComments();
}

async function initComments() {
  const wrapper = document.querySelector("section#comments");
  if (!wrapper) {
    return;
  }

  const placeholder = render(Placeholder());
  wrapper.appendChild(placeholder);

  try {
    const idRegex = /\/@\w+\/(\d+)$/;

    const url = wrapper.dataset.url;
    const postId = idRegex.exec(url)[1];
    const commentContext = url.replace(idRegex, `/api/v1/statuses/$1/context`);

    const comments = await loadComments(commentContext, postId);
    const commentsList = render(
      comments.length === 0 ? EmptyList() : ReplyList(comments),
    );
    placeholder.replaceWith(commentsList);
  } catch (err) {
    console.error(err);
    placeholder.innerText =
      `Could not load comments because of: ${err.message}`;
  }
}
```

On page load, we check if there's a comment section and render a Placeholder
component inside this section, to indicate the comments are loading. I use
[Lume's front matter][lume02] to conditionally add this section with a data
attribute with an url to a Mastodon post, if it exists.

Then I get this url, process it to get only the post ID and create the final API
call, and with the result, I replace the placeholder with the right component.

## Simple as that

That's all I wanted to share with you. You may find the final and complete code
[here][jedi01]. And the CSS for the comments are in a dedicated file
[here][jedi02]. Feel free to use them.

> Update: A version of the script without that `h()` and `render()` functions,
> only manipulating the DOM, can be found [here][jedi03]

My current flow today is as follows: I publish an article on my blog, then I
post a toot on my Mastodon profile promoting the post. With that toot url, I
update my blog article connecting both. Et voilà! Replies are now comments.

Besides mine, and Julian's take that I mentioned a lot on this text, there are a
lot of different people doing the same in different ways, with different
languages and technologies. I'd like to directly mention
[Óscar Otero's version][oscarotero01] with webcomponents, where he lists all the
"inspiration chain" that led to his version.

God, how I love the open source community!

I hope that you too will be inspired to create your own version. And if you do,
please, show me!

Thanks!

> A special thanks to [@BackAlleyUrbanist][urbanists01] for reviewing my broken
> english.

[csstricks01]: https://css-tricks.com/no-class-css-frameworks/
[developit01]: https://jasonformat.com/wtf-is-jsx/
[fietkau01]: https://fietkau.blog/2023/another_blog_resurrection_fediverse_new_comment_system
[jedi01]: https://github.com/thiagojedi/thiagojedi.github.io/blob/main/src/assets/mastodon_comments.js
[jedi02]: https://github.com/thiagojedi/thiagojedi.github.io/blob/main/src/comments.css
[jedi03]: https://github.com/thiagojedi/thiagojedi.github.io/blob/main/src/assets/mastodon_comments_vanilla.js
[lume01]: https://lume.land/
[lume02]: https://lume.land/docs/creating-pages/page-data/
[oscarotero01]: https://github.com/oom-components/mastodon-comments
[preact01]: https://preactjs.com/
[urbanists01]: https://urbanists.social/@BackAlleyUrbanist
